>> With cognitive
decline on the rise,
a search for solutions has
never been more pressing.
A groundbreaking recent
study on intermittent fasting
suggests that the way
we time our eating
may play a significant
role in our brain health.
This is Gaia News.
For thousands of
years, people have
been fasting for religious
and spiritual reasons
while reaping a host
of physical benefits.
Today, however, the
standard Western diet
has left many overfed
but undernourished.
While fasting
practices are not new,
there is a host of
new research showing
that they may be an important
key to preserving health
in a time of disease
Dr. Edward Group
is a naturopathic
physician who has
been incorporating fasting
in his practice for years
with great success.
>> Fasting's something that's
been used for thousands
of years actually.
And it's nothing
more than really
giving your body the time
it needs to heal itself.
The human race right now eats
probably 10 times or more
the amount of food that we
need to repair and regenerate.
So what that means is all of
that builds up and builds up
and it takes a lot of our
energy to be able to digest
all of this stuff.
And that's why you see
the benefits of healing.
You see the benefits
of neurocognition.
of weight loss.
You see the benefits of
multiple different conditions
that people may be
suffering from just
by reducing the amount of
food that you're eating.
And it frees up the
energy through your body
to heal and regenerate.
>> Dr. John Douillard is
an Ayurvedic practitioner
and researcher who also sees
the enormous benefits of fasting
protocols.
>> Intermittent fasting, time
restricting eating, you know,
calorie restriction,
they're all really,
really well-studied to support
a host of benefits from weight
loss to lower blood pressure
to better metabolic activity,
blood sugar, you know,
cholesterol triglycerides,
all of that.
So there's a lot of
benefit for not eating.
In one study, the average
American eats 100% of the food
that they need and then
they go and eat another 100%
they don't actually need.
And if the studies
show that if you just
take 30% less of the
extra 100%, then you
have all these amazing benefits.
So it really does work.
And it particularly
works well in America,
because we eat and
overeat way too much.
>> While there are a number of
different fasting techniques,
intermittent fasting has
especially risen in popularity
of late, both because of its
relative ease and its unique
benefits.
>> Intermittent fasting
is nothing more than just
extending the amount of
time before your next meal.
Skip dinner and don't
eat anything after five
or skip breakfast.
And that's a good start to ease
in by just skipping one meal.
Even skipping one meal
will give your body
more energy to heal itself.
>> Intermittent fasting was the
subject of one recent study,
in respect to its specific
effect on cognition and memory.
Researchers studying mice
compared a control group
that received a standard
diet of daily feeding,
a group on a daily
calorie restricted diet,
and an intermittent fasting
group in which the mice were
fed every other day.
Remarkably, only the mice in
the intermittent fasting group
demonstrated improved
long-term memory retention
compared to the other groups.
>> And the results of the study
showed that the intermittent
fasting actually activated
the klotho gene, which,
which is the longevity gene that
we have inside our system that
works all throughout our system
to help preserve the telomeres
and help regenerate the nerves.
>> Specifically, the study
found that the klotho gene plays
a central role in the
production of new neurons
in the hippocampus, a process
known as neurogenesis.
These neurons are important
for memory formation.
And their production
declines with age.
Researchers hope that the
neurogenesis activated
by the klotho gene
has the potential
to slow the advance of cognitive
decline in older people.
For doctor group, the effects
of fasting on the brain
go beyond genetic upregulation.
>> With what we've evaluated
with fasting is it's a lot more
than just looking
at a longevity gene.
That's great.
That does give us some
scientific evidence,
but we've also
found that there's
a lot of chemicals,
a lot of toxins
that are in the brain tissue.
We found that the root cause
of all negative conditions
is nothing more than an
accumulation of a toxic gut,
a toxic liver, a toxic body.
And what we found
is these chemicals
and these toxins
are the ones that
degrade these neuropathways.
They're the ones that alter
the electrical conductivity
of these neural pathways.
So what we believe is that
the intermittent fasting
and water-only fasting,
the first thing that it's
doing to repair or to
initiate this neurogenesis
is it's detoxifying the negative
things or the negative toxins
that are in the brain tissue.
>> Dr. Douillard has another
theory on why intermittent
fasting may be so beneficial
to cognitive function.
>> When you don't eat a
certain amount of food,
we know that the body
responds to that as a threat
to the system.
And when the body's under
a little bit of threat,
all of a sudden the body
starts thinking, whoa,
I'm not getting the food
that I was getting before.
So the body goes into cellular
recycling, cellular repair.
And we know when that
happens, the mitochondria
make more energy.
The cells live longer.
You know, all the repair
vehicles, stem cells activate.
Genes turn on that
wouldn't turn on otherwise
because you kickstarted them
by telling the body, hey,
you're not getting food today.
You better figure out a
way to get your energy.
And the body does that.
>> Given the number of
different theories on the topic,
the next step for researchers is
to conduct further studies with
human participants.
While it may be some time
before there is consensus
on the exact mechanism behind
intermittent fasting's effect,
it is clear that how
much and when we eat
may be just as important
as what we eat.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.